BILLING APPLICATION FUNCTIONALITY
Billing Module functionalities:
Billing application will have four types
Out Patient Billing
In patient Billing 
Emergency Room billing 
Daycare Billing 
 
Billing Masters 
Service Group Master
Service Master 
Patient category Master
Payment Entitlement Master 
Mode of Payments Master 
 Currency Master 
Currency denomination Master 
Discount Reason Master 
Price Master 
Tariff Master (multiple tariffs derived from Base tariff)
Package Master 
Contract Master 
Common features to be available in all billing functionalities 
Privileged based access to billing module 
Standard roles available in billing module 
Hospital Administrator / CFO 
OPD Billing Manager
IPD Billing Manager 
OPD Front desk manager 
Admission Desk manager
OPD Billing executives 
IPD Billing executives
Daycare Billing executive 
ER Billing Executive 
Accounts manager 
Back Office Executive 
Data to be captured for audit logs 
Organization ID
Location ID 
Date and Time in milli seconds 
Created by 
Updated by 
User details 
Machine Mac address 
Audit reports to be available for all transactions 
No two users should be able to open same patient’s bill 
Handle Concurrency at all levels 
Multi-Currency option. Define default currency with to take payments in multiple currency.  
Base Rate for the service 
System to have facility to define base rate for all types of services. 
System to have facility to change base rate in terms of percentage / Amount for service group or specific service with validity period (Start date and end date)
Variable pricing 
System to have facility to define rates based on below variables 
Patient category 
National 
Foreign National 
Below Poverty Line 
Patient Type 
Employee 
NOK of Employee
Visit Type
OPD visit 
IPD Visit 
ER Visit 
Daycare visit 
Billing Bed category 
Applicable in case of in patients 
Payment Entitlement
Self-Pay 
 Insurance 
Corporate 
Stat charges 
In case of Inpatients, if service is ordered and rendered after office hours then patient will be charged extra in terms of percentage over standard billing
How to derive pricing
Outpatient Visit
In patient Visit
ER Visit
Daycare Visit
Pick up service to be Billed
Pick up service to be Billed
Pick up service to be Billed
Pick up service to be Billed
Pick up base price for the service
Pick up patient’s Category
Pick up patient’s Category
Pick up patient’s Category
Pick up patient category like National / Foreigner etc. 
Pick up patient’s Bed Type
Pick up patient’s Bed Type
Pick up patient’s Bed Type
Check patient’s Payment Entitlement
Pick up patient’s Payment Entitlement
Pick up patient’s Payment Entitlement
Pick up patient’s Payment Entitlement
Pick up price based on patient’s category and Payment Entitlement
Check when service was ordered. Normal / After office hours
Check when service was ordered. Normal / After office hours
Pick up base price for the service
In case of package Billing consider package Price as the base price and derive amount based on patient’s Category and Payment Entitlement
Pick up base price for the service
Pick up base price for the service
Derive charges based on patient category- patient’s bed type- patient’s payment entitlement

Derive charges based on patient category- patient’s bed type- patient’s payment entitlement- Time when service was ordered
Derive charges based on patient category- patient’s bed type- patient’s payment entitlement- Time when service was ordered
In case Package is to be applied to the patient, pick up Base package price and derive package price based on patient’s category- bed type-patient’s payment entitlement.
Services which are not covered as part of package, apply rule for individual service

In case Package is to be applied to the patient, pick up Base package price and derive package price based on patient’s category- bed type-patient’s payment entitlement.
Services which are not covered as part of package, apply rule for individual service
Material Billing should happen as per Price defined in the Material Master. No variations based on Patient’s category etc.
Material Billing should happen as per Price defined in the Material Master. No variations based on Patient’s category etc.

Material Billing should happen as per Price defined in the Material Master. No variations based on Patient’s category etc.




Rate validity 
System to have facility to define Start date and end date for the price. Rate will be applicable between start date and end date. Any price revision in same period then system to pick up latest updated rate. 
Validity period of derived rates has to be less than that of base rate. 
Various stages of Bills
Partial Payment 
Application should give an alert in case user is collecting partial payment.
Facility to capture reason from drop down for partial payment collection.
Status of any bill for which amount is collected partially will be “On-Hold”. With bill on hold patient should be able to avail all services.
In case patient’s In- patient / OPD / Daycare / ER bill is on hold, whenever patient comes next time application should alert user about bills on Hold and amount patient must pay.
Application should have facility to collect money multiple number of times using any mode of payment.
Application should have the facility to collect the amount in multi payment mode at the time of payment collection.
On-Hold Bill
If the bill is having part payment, then system should automatically make the bill to On-hold
When there is a cancellation, the closed bill should be updated with an on-hold status and the user should be able to do refund from this bill for the amount of cancelled service
When there is a refund, the bill should be settled with on-hold status. Once refund is completed, the bill status should be changed to “Closed”.
Multiple refunds should be possible from an on-hold bill till the refund amount is completely exhausted
Provision to define with reason for which bill is put on hold
Closure of On-hold bill using “Wave off” option or any other option available to settle the Bill.
In case of OP Bill, in case any service is cancelled, application should reverse Bill status from “Settled” to “On-Hold” so that refund can be done.
Settled Bill
Bill can be settled only when complete payment is made
Facility to select services for which bill is to be generated and payment can be collected
Settled bill status can change to “On-Hold” when service in the bill is cancelled
Interim Bill
Once bill generated for any visit type, application should open next Interim Bill for the patient. Even though the bill status is “On -Hold” application should generate Next Interim Bill so that services ordered can flow to the Interim Bill.
Services ordered by the doctor during his OP consultation, should flow to patient’s Interim Bill which user can select all or partial and generates next Bill
In case of OP billing where user has option to select services for billing from services ordered by the doctor, once bill is generated for the selected services remaining services should automatically flow to next Interim Bill.
In case of In-patient, Daycare and ER visit services which are rendered to the patient should flow to the interim bill.
Application should have provision to print Interim bill for In- patient which can be from 1st Day of Admission till date or over a period.
In case user selects date range, application should display bill number of services which are rendered prior to the start date as a consolidated amount and from the Start Date should display date wise. 
Cancellation Bill
In case user wants to edit settled bill, system should first cancel previous bill then give facility to edit bill (addition / deletion of services)
System to keep track of cancelled bill.
Intermediate Bill
Application should have facility to select all types of services which has flown to patient’s interim bill and generate Intermediate bill for the patient. 
Intermediate bill generated will be considered as Partial Final Bill, which means against patient’s one In-patient encounter there will be more than one Intermediate Bill. 
Once Intermediate bill is generated, services which are selected for generating the bill will be removed from patient’s Interim Bill. 
Application should have provision to display details Intermediate Bill generated in Patient’s running Interim Bill.
Unless and until all services in patient’s Interim bill are settled, application should not open new Interim bill for the patient and no financial clearance will be done.
Once Intermediate Bill generated, no user should be able to edit Bill.
Application should have the facility to create intermediate bill for admitted patient.
If patient will stay longer time in the hospital, and hospital wants to settled his bill in between his stays in the hospital till date then application should have the facility to settled his bill till date without discharge. 
Intermediate bill also one kind of final bill only the difference is that we will create Intermediate bill without patient discharge.
Once intermediate bill will be created against in patient then all the charges which convert in to the intermediate bill is removed from the patient open charge list.
Remaining charges after the intermediate will keep on adding in the patient bill against the same encounter.

Bill Number 
System should assign Unique Bill number based on bill type mentioned above which should be consecutive number. 
System should never skip any number 
Taxation 
System to have facility to define Tax master with tax percentage and validity end date 
Facility to define tax applicability for a service / service group 
Facility to define applicable tax if tax is applicable 
Package creation 
Various types of packages required as part of billing application 
Visit based packages 
OPD packages 
IPD Packages 
In these packages Room / ICU stay will be included 
Daycare packages 
Gender based packages 
Male 
Female 
Common 
Billing Bed category 
In case of In patient, number of days of stay in specific Billing bed category can be defined, For example Three days of Private room etc. 
System to alert user if patient is getting transferred to Billing bed which is higher than defined bed. For example, Super Deluxe room. If patient is transferred to higher billing bed category, then differential price to be charged over and above package price.
Packages for Corporates 
Facility to create packages for Specific Corporate / Insurance company
Common functionalities in Packages 
System to calculate Package Cost (addition of service rates and average moving price of pharmacy items).
Offer discount over Package cost and derive package Price. patient will be billed based on package price 
Calculate patient wise package profit 
Copy one package and do modifications for creating another package 
Package versioning. 
Facility to Edit existing package and save as next version
Types of services which can be part of package 
Following types of services can be part of packages 
Hospital Services 
Registration charges
Nursing charges 
Administration charges 
Consultation fees (OPD packages)
Primary Consultation 
Follow up consultation 
Free Consultations 
Pathology services
Individual Services 
Profiles / Panel 
Imaging services 
Room Rents / ICU charges 
Surgery charges 
Procedure charges 
Non-invasive Diagnostic procedures 
Invasive Diagnostic procedures 
Periodicity services (Charged based on usage)
Medical gases 
Bed side monitor charges 
Doctor visit charges (In case of In patients)
First visit 
Follow up visits 
Miscellaneous services 
Inventory items 
Medicines 
Consumables 
Implants (Consignment / Stock)
Miscellaneous services 
Diet 
CSSD charges 
Forcefull inclusion / exclusion of services 
User to have facility to forcefully include services / Pharmacy service till Zero package profit. Over and above package cost, system to give alert and send request for approval. Such services can be included in package against approval 
Package validity date. 
Package should be valid between defined date range. Before start date and after end date package should not be available for assigning it to the patient 
Deactivation of packages. 
Deactivated package should not be visible for assigning to the patient 
Forcefull closure of package 
User to have facility to forcefully close package. After forceful closure no service can be included as apart of package 
Removal of package from patient bill 
If user wants to remove package from patient’s bill, first system to mandate user to remove all services from the package then allow user to remove package. Removed services will be billed as per billing rule like in case of In patients based on patient type (National / Below Poverty Line), Payment entitlement (Self / Credit) and Billing bed category. 
Applicability of packages. 
Once package is assigned to the patient, the package will be applicable till end of encounter for the patient 

Various types of packages (these will be Visit based and gender based)
EHC packages 
These are OPD packages which can be corporate specific. 
Packages with CAP
These packages will have CAP amount defined based on Service group or individual services. Services / Inventory items rendered over and above CAP amount will be charged extra. In these packages scenario of Split service also to be handled (Partially consumed from package and remaining portion to be billed extra)
All Inclusive packages 
In these packages unless and until user defines exclusions all services / Inventory items are included in packages.  
Either Or packages
In this type of package user will have facility to order one service between two. For Example, Stress test / Dopamine induced stress 
Multi visit package 
In this type of package, user can define number of OPD visits or IPD visits / Daycare visits or combination of visits. Patient will be charged for the package in first visit, in subsequent visits system to generate Zero amount bill. 
Contract Creation 
Define Visit Type 
OPD
IPD
Daycare 
Define Employee category 
Type of Contract 
Corporate Contract
Insurance Contract 
Contract validity period
Define applicable terrif 
Define Inclusions and Exclusions service wise / service group wise 
Define Co pay amount 
Define CAP amount for included services 
Define Credit limit for the organization 
Define Payment Terms
Define Packages under contract 
In case of corporate contracts, facility to create multiple contracts based on employee grades 
Patient Billing 
Registration Charges 
Registration applicable or not
If yes whether it is one time recurring 
If recurring duration when registration charge become applicable 
Consultation charges 
Facility to define separate rates for Primary / Follow up consultation / Secondary consultation 
Facility to define separate rates based on specialty / consultant 
Doctor visit charges / Visit charges for Inpatients 
Facility to define separate rates based on specialty / consultant 
Facility to define number of applicable visits per day 
Facility to post extra visit charges if number exceeds applicable visits 
Room rent charges 
Applicable only for in patient / Daycare and ER beds
Charging based on bed occupied at the time room rent posting 
Facility to charge half day bed charges if patient is admitted / discharged after 12:00 pm and full day if patient is admitted / discharged before 12:00 pm
Bed Down grade / Upgrade policy 
In case of package patients, system should restrict user from transferring patient to bed category for which package is not defined 
Revised pricing will be applicable after patient is accepted on new bed category 
Services billing
In case of Inpatient amount will be posted against order and revenue recognition when service is rendered. Two-step process required if user wants to cancel rendered service. 
Type of Service
Trigger point for patient billing
Laboratory services
When sample status changes to “In process” from “Pending” or “Sample Collected” or “Sample Received”.
In case Laboratory wants to recollect the sample, patient should be billed only once.
Radiology services
When patient status changes to “In Process”
Bed side Procedures
When patient status changes to “In Process”
Surgery
When patient is “Wheeled in” to Operation Theatre
Pharmacy
Once Pharmacy Bill is generated or issue the drugs
Consumables
Once Bill is generated or Nurse makes consumption in Pharmacy module for the patient or issue the consumables
Blood and Blood Products
When Blood or Blood Product is issued against request
Room rent
Automatic 
Meal Service
Automatic
Extra Meal
Once shipped from Kitchen against Meal Order 
Doctor Visit Charges
Consultant prepares Progress note / Automatic as well as manual (Application configuration)
Nursing charges
Automatic as well as manual (Application Configuration)
Package
First service from the package is rendered to the patient 
Lab Profile
When first service from the Profile is rendered to the patient.
Crash Cart
Consumption of an item

Discount functionality 
Bill level discount 
Service group level discount
Service level discount 
Promotional Discount 
User can give only type of discount in one bill 
Facility to define discount applicability in service master 
Facility to define Max discount which can be offered in service master 
Define authority to give discount in terms of Value or Percentage 
Request need to go to next level if not authorized to give discount 
Facility to reject / partially accept request 
Reason for discount is mandatory 
Apportioning of discount across all services rendered to patient 
Facility to take Security deposit for Credit patient. Amount can be based on percentage of bill amount or value. Security deposit can’t be utilised for bill settlement. It can be adjusted against denials from credit company 
Provision to offer special pricing for specific services for limited period 
Facility to define Promotional offer – Name, Services / service group included, start date – end date, Criteria to avail offer (Gender / Age group / Primary Diagnosis like Haemophilia)
Concession on patient bill 
Concession can be applicable to specified patient category / payment entitlement 
Concession can be defined in patient category master for making it applicable by default 
Concession can be given at Service group / Service Level 
Concession can be given even on Pharmacy item / Category of item 
Deposit functionality 
Deposit can be taken against specific Encounter 
Deposit can be taken against specific service group / Pharmacy 
Deposit can be taken against any forthcoming encounters (Active deposit)
Facility to use Active deposit to any family member’s encounter (OTP authentication required to validate)
Deposit can be taken against bed reservation (amount can change based on billing bed category) or against surgery booking
Facility to refund unutilized deposit 
Credit Note functionality 
Credit note can be created against settled bill / unused discount 
Two-step process for credit note approval 
Credit note can be created if hospital want to offer discount after bill is settled 
Either refund can be generated against refund or can be added as Active deposit 
System to generate Unique Credit note number
Debit Note functionality 
Debit note can be created after patient bill is settled and hospital wants to add services 
Debit note can be created against denials from Credit Company 
Debit can be given to vendors against GRN 
Debit note to be displayed at the time of upcoming transactions 
Debit note can be added in patient’s next bill or bill can be generated against debit note 
Vendor’s debit note can be adjusted against Vendor’s payment 
Refund functionality 
Facility to refund against Credit note or against deposit available 
Define how much Cash can be given back to patient 
If refund amount exceeds Cash limit the front office send request to back office for E Transfer / DD / Cheque 
Facility to create Refund Voucher number 
Cash refunded to be captured against user and will have impact Cash Desk management report (Cash in hand = Cash collected – Cash refunded)
Bill estimation  
Bill estimation can be done for registered as well unregistered patient 
Variable to be considered for bill estimation 
Patient Category 
Patient Type 
Payment Entitlement 
Admission type (Medical / Surgical)
Billing bed category  
Package 
Duration of stay 
Services which can be availed 
Pharmacy items required 
System to generate estimation number 
System to keep track of difference between estimated amount and actual amount 
Change of Payee
For Inpatients facility to change payee during patient’s stay but before bill settlement (From self to credit and other way)
System to recalculate patient bill after change of payee
System to validate availability of package for the selected payee else stop user from changing payee. User will have to change package the change payee
In case payee is credit company then system to check whether patient is occupying applicable billing bed category. If not user alert to transfer patient to applicable bed category 
Auto posting of charges 
Facility to define which services can be auto posted in patient’s bill 
System to run scheduled job to post charges by default in patient’s bill 
No admission / transfers to be allowed during auto posting 
Payment Follow up process
Due deposit dashboard for patients 
System to run scheduled job to calculate deposit available in case of Cash patient / available authorisation in case of credit patients
System to display separately amount of ordered but not rendered services like upcoming surgery 
Report should be visible to authorised users who will manually add amount to be paid by patient 
System to generate emails to NOK regarding payments 
Credit payable dashboard 
Like patient system to generate dashboard for Credit companies like Insurance / Corporate on amount pending against invoice raised as well as patient bills against which Invoice not yet raised 
System to highlight amount which is over due as per payment terms defined in contract 
Credit patient billing 
Insurance Billing 
Facility to assign multiple credit companies to the patient 
Facility to capture Insurance details like Name, Associate company, Provider / TPA, Insurance policy number, Insured amount, Insurance Start Date and end date, Multiple authorization numbers along with date and amount of authorisation, claim number, Claim amount.
Facility to define sequence in which contracts can be consumed 
System to give alert in case authorization amount exceeds credit payable amount
In case of Co-Pay, system to split service amount into Self and Credit payable amount 
In case credit payable amount exceeds Insured amount then excess amount to be chargeable to patient 
Facility to collect security deposit at the time discharge 
Security deposit to be adjusted against denials coming from Insurance after submitting final bill 
Refund of security deposit after bill is settled 
Corporate Billing 
Facility to add employee details and applicable contract for the employee 
Exclusions to be charged to patient
Co pay amount to be charged to patient 
In case patient is occupying bed which is not applicable, difference to be posted as patient payable amount 
Back-office functionality 
At application configuration level give facility to define whether hospital wants to generate invoice for patient’s OPD/ IPD/ Daycare / ER bills to Insurance / Corporate. Based these flags system should mandate user to generate Invoice 
Invoice settlement process capturing denial amount, TDS, amount paid. Bill can be settled if bill amount is equal to addition of paid amount +Denials + TDS






